<div id="content" class="topic-text" data-wv="http://www.openlinksw.com/Virtuoso/WikiV/" data-vi="http://www.openlinksw.com/virtuoso/xslt/" data-ie="http://www.openlinksw.com/Virtuoso/InclEng/" data-fn2="http://www.w3.org/2004/07/xpath-functions" data-xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">

<div class="MACRO_TOC">

## Table of Contents

  - [What is ODBC?](#What%20is%20ODBC%3F)
  - [What is the ODBC Value
    Proposition?](#What%20is%20the%20ODBC%20Value%20Proposition%3F)
  - [What is iODBC?](#What%20is%20iODBC%3F)
  - [What is the iODBC Value
    Proposition?](#What%20is%20the%20iODBC%20Value%20Proposition%3F)

</div>

## <span id="What%20is%20ODBC%3F"></span>What is ODBC?

ODBC is the acronym for Open DataBase Connectivity, a Microsoft
Universal Data Access standard that started life as the Windows
implementation of the X/Open SQL Call Level Interface specification.
Since its inception in 1992 it has rapidly become the industry standard
interface for developing database independent applications. Is is also
the emerging standard interface for SQL based database engines replacing
many of the first generation Embedded SQL and proprietary call level
interfaces provided by database engine and database connectivity
middleware vendors alike.

## <span id="What%20is%20the%20ODBC%20Value%20Proposition%3F"></span>What is the ODBC Value Proposition?

The ability to develop applications independent of back-end database
engine.

## <span id="What%20is%20iODBC%3F"></span>What is iODBC?

iODBC is the acronym for Independent Open DataBase Connectivity, an Open
Source platform independent implementation of both the ODBC and X/Open
specifications. It is rapidly emerging as the industry standard for
developing solutions that are language, platform and database
independent.

## <span id="What%20is%20the%20iODBC%20Value%20Proposition%3F"></span>What is the iODBC Value Proposition?

The ability to develop applications independent of back-end database
engine, operating system, and for the most part programming language.
Although ODBC and iODBC are both 'C' based Application Programming
Interfaces (APIs) there are numerous cross language hooks and bridges
from languages such as: C++, Java, Perl, Python, TCL etc.

iODBC has been ported to numerous platforms, including Linux (x86,
Itanium, Alpha, Mips, and StrongArm), Solaris (Sparc & x86), AIX, HP-UX
(PA-RISC & Itanium), Digital UNIX, Dynix, Generic UNIX 5.4, FreeBSD,
MacOS 9, MacOS X, DG-UX, and OpenVMS.

</div>
